**1. Introduction**


[Galaxy](https://usegalaxy.org/) is a web based data analysis plattform that is easy to use.Because data analysis can be complex, it often requires knowlege in programming however,galaxy has made this easier especially for scientists without a background in programming. This is by providing an easy to use graphical interface to popular data analysis tools. This has made galaxy popular where it offers over eight thousand analysis tools.
Galaxy is widely used. It currently has over ten thousand publications.There are three main Galaxy servers. Galaxy Main, Galaxy Europe, and Galaxy Australia, where registering an account is free. There are smaller galaxy servers but theese tend to be domain specific.

The galaxy community offers training on the use of these servers. The training workshop GTN Smorgasbord, a a global training event on galaxy. You can find the course and all the materials [here](https://shiltemann.github.io/global-galaxy-course/)

**2. Introduction to galaxy and NGS**

Here I learnt how to manipulate and process NGS data.
The most important step in any galaxy analysis is quality control.It is important to note that Galaxy is using FASTQ Sanger as the only legitimate input for downstream processing tools and provides a number of utilities for converting FASTQ files into this form. 
Fastq datasets contain; sequence of the read and base qualities for each nucleotide in the read.The base qualities allow us to judge how trustworthy each base in a sequencing read is.Galaxy uses mainly FastqQC is a tool allowing one to assess the quality of FASTQ datasets. It gives output inform of a multiQC report that contains quality reports. Generally, this steps informs measures such as trimming of low quality reads( those that fall bellow a phred score of 30) and removing adapters usin fastp tool etc. The FASTQC tool needs to be run again after quality control to make sure that the remaining reads are of good quality.

Here is my shared [history](https://usegalaxy.eu/u/asatsa/h/first-quality-control) for quality control.


**3. Mapping**
Mapping of NGS reads against reference sequences is one of the key steps of the analysis. Key mainstream mapping tools includes BWA, BWA-MMA , Bowtie2 among  others. Mappers usually compare reads against a reference sequence that has been transformed into a highly accessible data structure called genome index.Galaxy instances typically store indexes for a number of publicly available genome builds but also allows loading of your own genome reference. Such indexes however should be generated before mapping begins. 
SAM/BAM files are the standerd out put generated by mapers. The Sequence Alignment/Map (SAM) format is a generic nucleotide alignment format that describes the alignment of sequencing reads (or query sequences) to a reference. The human readable, TABdelimited SAM files can be compressed into the Binary Alignment/Map format. These BAM files are bigger than simply gzipped SAM files, because they have been optimized for fast random access rather than size reduction. Position-sorted BAM files can be indexed so that all reads aligning to a locus can be efficiently retrieved without loading the entire file into memory.

Galaxy has the following tools to manipulate SAM/BAM files; SAMtools offers various utilities for manipulating alignments in the SAM/BAM format, including sorting, merging, indexing and generating alignments in a per-position format and BEDtools for analysis of BAM and VCF datasets. Visualization can then be carried out using a web-based Galaxy tool JBrowse or a visualization tool IGV(Integrative Genome Viewer)
An example of a worklow can be found on this tutorial [here](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/introduction/tutorials/galaxy-intro-ngs-data-managment/tutorial.html?utm_source=smorgasbord&utm_medium=website&utm_campaign=smorgasbord2021)

**4. Genome Assembly**

*De novo* assembly
Assembly recipe
1. Find all overlaps between reads
2. Build a graph
3. Simplify the graph
4. Traverse the graph

*Tutorial*


**5. Transcriptomics**

**6. R in Galaxy**

Galaxy provide for a way to acces R studio from the plattform. This especialy comes handy when performing operations that do better in R such as data visualisation. visualization are an important step to check the data, their quality and represent the results found for publication.In this course I worked on basic R and also performed visualizations on RNASeq data using ggplot2

**7. single- cell RNAseq analysis**

scRNA sequencing provides the means to explore this heterogeneity by examining samples at the individual cell level, enabling a greater understanding of the development and function of such samples, by the characteristics of their constituent cells. The analysis constitues:
1. Barcode Extraction using **UMI-tools extract** on  input forward and reverse FASTQ files, and extracted the UMI and cell barcode from the forward read sequence, and placed it into the header of both forward and reverse FASTQ files. i.e. FASTQ files → Modified FASTQ files
2. Mapping / Alignment using **RNA-STAR and MultiQC** The purpose of MultiQC is to observe how well our reads were mapped against the reference genome. The sequencing data from the reverse FASTQ file (with modified headers) and aligned it to a reference genome, using annotations presented in the GTF file for that genome. i.e. Modified FASTQ file (reverse) → BAM file
3. Filtering using Filter **BAM datasets on a variety of attributes**
4 .Quantification Once we have the name of the gene for a specific read, we can count how many of those reads fall into that gene and generate a count matrix.
   Counting reads is performed by two commonly-used tools: **RNA-STAR** and **FeatureCounts**Gene tags are added to the alignment file, and reads were grouped        according those sharing the same gene tag, with further reduction performed by collapsing all reads sharing the same cell and UMI barcode to be counted only once.
For further details and multi-bacth proceesing click [here](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material//topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-preprocessing/tutorial.html#single-batch-processing)


**8. Proteomics**

A proteome is the entire complement of proteins that can be expressed by a cell, tissue, or organism at a given time. These proteins are sequenced through mass-spectrometry which is a standard method for proteomic analysis. The method consits of thechniues such as; target proteomics,which measures a predefined set of proteins with accurate quantification; Mass spectrometry Imaging, which measures the location of proteins in thin tissue sections; shortgun/explorative proteomics which aims to identify as many proteins as posible in a sample. This is includes 2types Data depedent aquisions(DDA/DIA)

**Conclusion**

